TODAY CURBED THE PRESIDENT'S
POWER TO MAKE APPOINTMENTS WHEN
THE SENATE IS IN RECESS.
AND IN A SEPARATE CASE, SIDED
WITH ANTI-ABORTION PROTESTERS,
STRIKING DOWN BUFFER ZONES
OUTSIDE CLINICS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, THE
CRISIS IN IRAQ.
HOW SUNNI MILITANTS AND THEIR
ASSAULTS ON CITIES AND OIL
FIELDS ARE SOWING WORRY ABOUT
PRTHE
COUNTRY'S BORDERS.
>> Woodruff: AND FROM THE
SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATION OF
CAMBODIA.
THE STORY OF ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST VIBRANT FRESHWATER
ECOSYSTEMS.
AND HOW DEVELOPMENT AND
OVERFISHING COULD BE SPURRING
ITS DECLINE.
>> THIS IS THE MOST PRODUCTIVE
FISHERY IN OUT WORLD.
ALL THESE FISH ARE DISAPPEARING.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE U.S AND BRITAIN
MADE FRESH DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS
TODAY TO ADDRESS THE GROWING
TURMOIL IN IRAQ.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
URGED LEADING ARAB STATES TO
FORM A UNITED FRONT AGAINST THE
ISLAMIST INSURGENCY IN BOTH IRAQ
AND SYRIA.
AND IN BAGHDAD, BRITISH FOREIGN
SECRETARY WILLIAM HAGUE MET WITH
SHIITE PRIME MINISTER NOURI AL-
MALIKI AND PRESSED HIM TO BRING
SUNNIS AND KURDS INTO A NEW
GOVERNMENT.
>> WE BELIEVE THE URGENT
PRIORITY MUST BE TO FORM AN
INCLUSIVE GOVERNMENT FOLLOWING
ON FROM THE RECENT ELECTIONS
THAT CAN COMMAND THE SUPPORT OF
ALL IRAQIS AND
ERROSTS D THR TEIBLE
CRIMES.
>> Ifill: AND ON SYRIA,
PRESIDENT OBAMA ASKED CONGRESS
FOR $500 MILLION DOLLARS TO
TRAIN AND ARM WESTERN-BACKED
REBELS FIGHTING THE ASSAD
REGIME.
THEY'VE BEEN LOSING GROUND TO
ISLAMIST FACTIONS, AND THE WHITE
HOUSE HAS BEEN UNDER PRESSURE TO
DO MORE.
>> Woodruff: THOUSANDS OF
UKRAINIANS RUSHED TO CROSS INTO
RUSSIA TODAY, A DAY BEFORE A
WEEK-OLD CEASE-FIRE EXPIRES.
THEY WERE THE LATEST IN AN
EXODUS OF CIVILIANS TRYING TO
ESCAPE FIGHTING.
MEANWHILE, IN PARIS, SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY WARNED
RUSSIA TO MOVE QUICKLY ON
RESTORING PEACE IN UKRAINE.
HE SPOKE AS EUROPEAN LEADERS
PREPARE TO CONSIDER NEW
SANCTIONS ON MOSCOW.
>> WE ARE IN FULL AGREEMENT THAT
IT IS CRITICAL FOR RUSSIA TO
SHOW IN THE NEXT HOURS,
LITERALLY, THAT THEY ARE MOVING
TO HELP DISARM THE SEPARATISTS,
TO ENCOURAGE THEM TO DISARM, TO
CALL ON THEM TO LAY DOWN THEIR
WEAPONS AND TO BEGIN TO BECOME
PART OF A LEGITIMATE POLITICAL
PROCESS.
>> Woodruff: LATER, A STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN SAID
KERRY WAS NOT SUGGESTING ANY
SPECIFIC TIMELINE ON POSSIBLE
SANCTIONS.
>> Ifill: INVESTIGATORS HAVE A
NEW THEORY ON WHAT HAPPENED TO
MALAYSIA AIRLINES FLIGHT 370.
THEY SAID TODAY THE PLANE FLEW
ON AUTOPILOT FOR HOURS BEFORE
CRASHING IN THE INDIAN OCEAN,
OFF AUSTRALIA.
AND, THEY SAID, THAT SUGGESTS
THE CREW WAS INCAPACITATED BY A
LOSS OF OXYGEN.
NOW, THEY'RE SHIFTING THE SEARCH
SOUTHWEST, TO A PRIORITY ZONE
WITHIN A NEW AREA THAT COVERS
ABOUT 23-THOUSAND SQUARE MILES.
AUSTRALIAN DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
WARREN TRUSS.
>> WE EXPECT THAT THE UNDERWATER
SEARCH ELEMENT WILL COMMENCE IN
AUGUST AND TAKE ABOUT 12 MONTHS
TO COMPLETE.
IN ADDITION, THE SEARCH EFFORT
WILL INCLUDE EQUIPMENT PROVIDED
BY MALAYSIA WHICH INCLUDES
VESSELS FITTED WITH SEARCH
EQUIPMENT INCLUDING TOWED SONAR
SYSTEMS WHICH WILL BE USED TO
SEARCH THE SEA FLOOR.
>> Ifill: THE SEARCH AREA HAS
BEEN COVERED FROM THE AIR AND ON
THE SURFACE.
THE EFFORT WILL NOW MOVE DEEP
UNDER WATER.
>> Woodruff: NEW YORK CITY'S BAN
ON BIG SODAS IS DEAD.
THE STATE'S HIGHEST COURT
REFUSED TODAY TO REINSTATE THE
RESTRICTION.
IT HAD BARRED RESTAURANTS, MOVIE
THEATERS AND OTHER BUSINESSES
FROM SELLING SUGARY DRINKS
LARGER THAN 16 OUNCES.
THE COURT RULED THE CITY HEALTH
BOARD HAD OVERSTEPPED ITS
AUTHORITY.
THE BAN ORIGINATED UNDER FORMER
MAYOR MICHAEL BLOOMBERG.
>> Ifill: IN ECONOMIC NEWS,
CONSUMER SPENDING ROSE JUST TWO-
TENTHS OF A PERCENT IN MAY,
SUGGESTING GROWTH MAY NOT BE AS
STRONG AS HOPED IN THE SECOND
QUARTER.
AND WALL STREET HAD A SUB-PAR
DAY, THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL
AVERAGE LOST 21 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 16,846; THE NASDAQ FELL A
FRACTION, TO CLOSE AT 4,379; AND
THE S&P 500 DROPPED TWO POINTS,
FINISHING AT 1,957.
>> Woodruff: FORMER SENATOR
HOWARD BAKER, WHO FAMOUSLY POSED
THE CENTRAL QUESTION FOR
PRESIDENT NIXON DURING
WATERGATE, DIED TODAY AT HIS
HOME IN TENNESSEE.
HE'D SUFFERED A STROKE LAST
WEEKEND.
THE MODERATE REPUBLICAN CAPTURED
THE SPOTLIGHT AT THE 1973
WATERGATE HEARINGS, AS HE
REPEATEDLY ASKED, "WHAT DID THE
PRESIDENT KNOW, AND WHEN DID HE
KNOW IT?"
HERE, HE QUESTIONS THEN-ATTORNEY
GENERAL JOHN MITCHELL.
>> IS THERE SUCH AN AURA OF
MAGNIFICENCE ABOUT THE
PRESIDENCY?
IS THERE SUCH AN AWESOME
RESPONSIBILITY FOR A MULTITUDE
OF PROBLEMS AND UNDERTAKINGS OF
THIS NATION THAT THE PRESIDENCY
IN SOME INSTANCES MUST BE SPARED
THE DETAIL, MUST BE SPARED THE
DIFFICULTY OF SITUATIONS WHICH
IN ORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES MIGHT
BE CONSIDERED BY SOME AT LEAST
TO BE FRANK, OPEN DECLARATIONS
OF CRIMINAL EVENTS?
IS THE PRESIDENCY TO BE
PROTECTED IN THAT WAY?
IS THE SPLENDOR OF THE ISOLATION
SO GREAT THAT THE PRESIDENT MUST
BE PROTECTED?
AND IF SO, IN WHAT CASES?
>> Woodruff: BAKER SPENT 18
YEARS IN THE SENATE AND SERVED
BOTH AS MAJORITY AND MINORITY
LEADER AT VARIOUS TIMES.
LATER, HE BECAME CHIEF OF STAFF
TO PRESIDENT REAGAN IN THE
WANING YEARS OF HIS
ADMINISTRATION.
MOST RECENTLY, BAKER SERVED AS
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR TO
JAPAN.
HOWARD BAKER WAS 88 YEARS OLD.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
THE SUPREME COURT DELIVERS A
BLOW TO THE PRESIDENT'S POWER TO
MAKE APPOINTMENTS.
AND IT STRUCK DOWN A LIMIT TO
SIDEWALK ABORTION PROTESTS.
THEN, WHAT THE CRISIS IN IRAQ
MEANS FOR OIL PRICES.
THE DECLINE OF ONE OF THE
WORLD'S MOST VIBRANT FRESHWATER
ECOSYSTEMS.
MORE GRIM DETAILS ABOUT TROUBLES
AT V.A. HOSPITALS.
TEAM U.S.A. DOWN BUT NOT OUT IN
THE RACE FOR THE WORLD CUP.
PLUS, A PROFILE OF THIS YEAR'S
PULITZER PRIZE WINNER IN POETRY.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S SUPREME
COURT HANDED DOWN A PAIR OF
UNANIMOUS DECISIONS TODAY IN TWO
HIGH-PROFILE CASES.
IN ONE, THE COURT REINED IN THE
APPOINTMENT POWERS OF THE
PRESIDENT.
THE JUSTICES RULED THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TEMPORARY
APPOINTMENTS TO THE NATIONAL
LABOR RELATIONS BOARD IN 2012
WERE ILLEGAL BECAUSE CONGRESS
WAS NOT IN RECESS.
THE JUSTICES ALSO STRUCK DOWN A
35 FOOT BUFFER ZONE PROHIBITING
PROTESTS OUTSIDE ABORTION
CLINICS IN MASSACHUSETTS FINDING
THE LIMIT VIOLATED THE FIRST
AMENDMENT RIGHTS OF
DEMONSTRATORS.
MARCIA COYLE OF THE NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL WAS AT THE COURT THIS
MORNING, AND SHE JOINS US NOW.
SO LET'S TAKE THIS CASE
INVOLVING PRESIDENTIAL POWERS
FIRST.
THE CASE WAS BROUGHT BY A
CANNING COMPANY, AND AS WE SAID,
IT HAD TO DO WITH THE PRESIDENT
MAKING APPOINTMENTS TO THE
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND DID HE THAT PURSUANT TO HIS
POWER UNDER THE RECESS
APPOINTMENTS CLAUSE IN THE
CONSTITUTION.
JUDY, IT'S SURPRISING THAT IN
MORE THAN 200 YEARS, THE SUPREME
COURT HAS NEVER LOOKED AT THE
SCOPE OR MEANING OF THE RECESS
APPOINTMENTS CLAUSE.
THEY HAD REALLY NO PRIOR
DECISIONS TO RELY ON IN THIS
CASE, BUT THEY HAD THREE
QUESTIONS THEY HAD TO ANSWER
BECAUSE OF A LOWER COURT RULING
THAT REALLY WAS IN FAVOR OF THE
WASHINGTON STATE BOTTLING
COMPANY THAT WAS FIGHTING A
RULING BY THE NLRB THAT IT HAD
ENGAGED IN UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE
WITH ITS UNION.
SO THE JUSTICES IN -- EVEN
THOUGH THIS WAS A UNANIMOUS
DECISION, JUDY, IT'S IMPORTANT
TO NOTE THAT IT WAS ONLY
UNANIMOUS IN THE END RESULT.
THAT THESE THREE APPOINTMENTS
WRIN VALID.
THE JUSTICES WERE SPLID 5-4 ON
HOW YOU REACH THAT RESULT.
AND IT WAS A VERY SHARP 5-4
SPLIT.
JUSTICE BREYER WROTE FOR
REALLY -- WROTE THE MAIN OPINION
FOR THE MAJORITY THAT INCLUDED
THE COURT'S MORE MODERATE
LIBERAL MEMBERS AS WELL AS
JUSTICE KENNEDY.
AND WHAT HE DID WAS HE LOOKED AT
THE MEANING OF THE WORDS IN THE
RECESS CLAUSE, THE RECESS.
AND ALSO LOOKED AT THE PURPOSE
OF THE CLAUSE, WHICH WAS TO
ENSURE THE SMOOTH FUNCTIONING OF
GOVERNMENT WHEN THERE ARE
VACANCIES AND GAVE CONSIDERABLE
WEIGHT TO HISTORICAL PRACTICES
OF PRESIDENTS AND THE SENATE.
>> Woodruff: IT REALLY DID COME
DOWN TO THE DEFINITION THAT THEY
COULD AGREE ON OF WHAT IS A
RECESS.
>> RIGHT.
EXACTLY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DOES IT MEAN
JARKS IS THE SENATE DOING OR NOT
DOING DURING THAT PERIOD SO THAT
THE PRESIDENT CAN MAKE
APPOINTMENTS WITHOUT SENATE
CONFIRMATION?
>> EXACTLY.
AND WHAT THE MAJORITY HELD HERE
WAS, ONE, THE PRESIDENT CAN MAKE
APPOINTMENTS DURING ANY RECESS
THAT IS AT LEAST TEN DAYS OR
LONGER.
THE ISSUE CAME UP THAT -- OR THE
LOWER COURT HAD HELD ONLY
BETWEEN ANNUAL SESSIONS OF
CONGRESS, NOT INTERCESSION,
RECESSES.
BUT THE COURT SAID ANY RECESS
THAT'S AT LEAST TEN DAYS OR
LONGER.
THE OTHER ISSUE THAT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT TO THIS PARTICULCASE T
COULD MAKE APPOINTMENTS TO FILL
VACANCIES DURING BREAKS BETWEEN
RO FORMA SESSIONS OF --
PRO FORMA SESSIONS OF CONGRESS.
IN THIS CASE, THERE WERE
THREE-DAY BREAKS.
AND THE SENATE SAID IT WAS IN
SESSION.
IT WAS NOT IN RECESS.
BUT THE MAJORITY HERE HELD AND
ACTUALLY THIS WAS UNANIMOUS THAT
THE SENATE DETERMINES WHEN IT IS
IN RECESS AND AS LONG AS IT'S
CAPABLE OF BEING ABLE TO DO
BUSINESS, IT'S IN SESSION.
AND THAT WAS THE CASE WITH THESE
THREE
CONSEQUENTLY, THE APPOINTMENTS
WERE INVALID.
>> Woodruff: AND IT WAS UMAN
MUSS AND THE RESULTS OF THE
JUSTICES DIFFERED IN THEIR
REASONING.
SOME TOUGH LANGUAGE FROM THE
CONSERVATIVE JUSTICES.
>> VERY TOUGH.
JUSTICE SCALIA READ A SUMMARY
WHAT WOULD BE THE DISSENT FROM
THE BENCH.
AND HE SAID -- HE DISAGREED
COMPLETELY WITH THE MAJORITY'S
VIEW HALF THE MEANING OF THE
WORDS RECESS WERE OR WHEN DOES A
VACANCY ARISE?
THAT WAS ANOTHER KEY ISSUE IN
THE CASE.
THE MAJORITY SAID THAT THE
PRESIDENT CAN FILL SAKENCIES
THAT OCCUR DURING THE RECESS AS
WELL AS PREEXISTING VACANCIES.
AND HE DISAGREED STRONGLY WITH
THE INTERPRETATION OF THE
HISTORY OF PRACTICES OF PRIOR
RES.
AND HE ACCUSED THE MAJORITY OF
MAKING UP RULES HERE AND OF
JUDICIAL ADVENTURISM.
BUT JUSTICE BREYER SAID UNDER
THE DISSENTING VIEWS, THOUSANDS
OF RECESS APPOINTMENTS WOULD
HAVE BEEN INVALIDATED UNDER THAT
VIEW.
>> Woodruff: IT'S INTERESTING.
THE OTHER BIG DECISION THEY
HANDED DOWN TODAY, ALSO
UNANIMOUS, BUT THE REASONING
DIFFERED AGAIN.
THIS ONE OF COURSE HAD TO DO
WITH MASSACHUSETTS LAW, A BAN ON
ANTI-ABORTION ACTIVISTS BEING
ABLE TO BE IN AN AREA OUTSIDE OF
ABORTION CLINICS.
>> IT ACTUALLY WAS A 35-FOOT
BUFFER ZONE, SO IT WASN'T JUST
ANTI-ABORTION PROTESTERS.
IT COULD BE PROABORTION RIGHTS
PROTESTERS AS WELL.
BUT IT KEPT OUT EVERYBODY EXCEPT
CLINIC EMPLOYEES AND
PEOPLE WHO NEEDED TO WALK
THROUGH THAT AREA IN ORDER TO
GET TO ANOTHER DESTINATION.
AND HERE JUSTICE ROBERTS WROTE
THE OPINION, WHICH WAS A
SURPRISE AS WELL, BECAUSE HE DID
NOT ASK ONE QUESTION DURING THE
ORAL ARGUMENTS IN THIS CASE.
BUT HE SAID IN HIS OPINION THAT
WHERE MASSACHUSETTS WENT WRONG
HERE WAS THAT IT DID NOT
NARROWLY TAILOR WHAT IT WAS
DOING TO THE PROBLEM IT WAS
TRYING TO SOLVE.
IT WANT YOUD TO HAVE ORDER ON
THE STREETS.
IT WANTED TO PROTECT PUBLIC
SAFETY AS LONG AS WOMEN'S
SAFETY, BUT THE BUFFER ZONE
BURDENED TOO MUCH SPEECH, AND
THESE WOMEN WHO BLOCKED THE
CHALLENGE, WHO REALLY WERE
ANTI-ABORTION ACTIVISTS, THEY
WERE NOT PROTESTERS, HE SAID.
THEY WANTED TO ENGAGE IN QUIET
COUNSELING OF THESE WOMEN, AND
THE BUFFER ZONE PREVENTED THEM
FROM THEIR TWO PRIMARY TOOLS
WHICH WERE FACE-TO-FACE
CONVERSATIONS AND DISTRIBUTING
LEAFLETS AND INFORMATION.
>> Woodruff: BUT THE LIBERAL
JUSTICES AGREED WITH THE FINAL
DEFINITION.
>> THEY DID.
AND I THINK HERE WHAT WAS
IMPORTANT WAS THE SUPREME COURT
WAS URGED BY ANTI-ABORTION
GROUPS BUT DID NOT OVERRULE A
PRIOR 2000 PRECEDENT ON BUFFER
ZONES.
AND ALSO, THE CHIEF JUSTICE SAID
THE LAW ITSELF DID NOT
DISCRIMINATE ON THE BASIS OF
VIEWPOINT.
IT DIDN'T FAVOR ANTI-ABORTION OR
PROABORTION OVER ONE OR THE
OTHER.
JUSTICE -- THE DISSENTERS AGAIN,
JUSTICE SCALIA WRITING, SAID
THAT IT DID DISCRIMINATE ON THE
BASIS OF VIEWPOINT AND THE COURT
SHOULD HAVE STRUCK IT DOWN ON
THAT BASIS AND SHOULD HAVE
THROWN OUT THAT 2000 PRECEDENT.
>> Woodruff: IT'S STILL UNUSUAL
I GUESS TO GET TWO UNANIMOUS
RULINGS ON THE SAME DAY.
YOU'RE THE EXPERT.
MARCIA, VERY QUICKLY.
ONE MORE DAY, WHEN THIS TERM THE
JUSTICES CAN HAND DOWN.
>> THERE'S A VERY IMPORTANT
UNION CASE AND THE OTHER IS THE
CHALLENGE BY THE RELIGIOUS
OWNERS OF FOR-PROFIT
CORPORATIONS TO THE
CONTRACEPTIVE REQUIREMENT IN THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
>> Woodruff: I HAVE A FEELING
WE'RE GOING TO BE RIGHT BACK
HERE ON MONDAY.
MARCIA COYLE.
THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE, JUDY.
>> Ifill: AS IRAQ CONTINUES TO
FRACTURE, THERE ARE NEW CONCERNS
ABOUT THE SECURITY OF ITS
CONSIDERABLE OIL PRODUCTION
FACILITIES.
ONLY LAST MONTH, THE COUNTRY'S
CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION REACHED 3.6
MILLION BARRELS A DAY, THE MOST
SINCE SADDAM HUSSEIN TOOK OVER
IN 1979.
THAT MADE IRAQ THE SEVENTH-
LARGEST PRODUCER IN THE WORLD.
FIGHTING AT IRAQ'S BIGGEST OIL
REFINERY HAS RAGED FOR A WEEK,
WITH THE GOVERNMENT ARMY
BATTLING FIGHTERS FROM ISIL--
THE ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND
THE LEVANT.
BOTH SIDES HAVE CLAIMED TO HAVE
THE UPPER HAND AT BEIJI, LOCATED
ABOUT 130 MILES NORTH OF
BAGHDAD, AN IRAQI MILITARY
SPOKESMAN YESTERDAY.
>> THE REFINERY IS UNDER THE
CONTROL OF OUR VALIANT ARMED
FORCES ISIL MILITANTS COULD NOT
IMPOSE CONTROL OVER A METRE,
ACTUALLY THE FIGHTING HAS BEEN
UNDERWAY FOR SEVEN DAYS NOW AND
THE RESULT IS 92 DEAD BODIES OF
ISIL MILITANTS SCATTERED IN THE
VICINITY OF THE REFINERY.
THE TRIBES IN BAIJI PROVIDED US
WITH PRECISE INFORMATION ABOUT
LOCATIONS OF ISIL MILITANTS AND
ABOUT THE SLEEPER CELLS, SO WE
HANDLED THEM THROUGH RAIDS AND
AIR STRIKES.
>> Ifill: THE CLASHES HAVE
STOPPED OIL PRODUCTION AT THE
BEIJI COMPLEX, WHICH HAD BEEN
ABLE TO REFINE UP TO 300,000
BARRELS A DAY.
TODAY, YET ANOTHER SITE CAME
UNDER ATTACK.
ISIL FIGHTERS ASSAULTED THE TOWN
OF MANSOURIYAT AL-JABAL, HOM
FOUR, CURRENTLY INACTIVE,
NATURAL GAS FIELDS.
BUT AMID THE GROWING CHAOS, THE
PRICE OF CRUDE EXPORTS HAS RISEN
BY ONLY $2.35 A BARREL, CLOSING
JUST UNDER $106 DOLLARS TODAY.
FUEL SUPPLIES WITHIN IRAQ ARE
ALSO UNDER STRAIN.
IN THE NORTHERN CITY OF ERBIL,
LINES FOR GASOLINE STRETCHED
MORE THAN A MILE ON SUNDAY.
>> ( translated ): THE CURRENT
SITUATION AFFECTS THE PEOPLES'
LIFE AND THEIR WORK.
PEOPLE HAVE BUSINESS TO DO.
I HAD TO LEAVE MY SHOP AND QUEUE
HERE TO SUPPLY MY CAR WITH FUEL.
IL COMES JUST
FOUR MONTHS AFTER IRAQI OIL
PRODUCTION HAD REACHED ITS
HIGHEST LEVELS IN MORE THAN 30
YEARS.
JOINING US FOR SOME ANALYSIS OF
WHAT THIS FRESH UPHEAVAL IN IRAQ
MEANS FOR THE ENERGY MARKETS, IS
GREG PRIDDY, DIRECTOR OF THE
GLOBAL ENERGY AND NATURAL
RESOURCES AT EURASIA GROUP, A
POLITICAL RISK RESEARCH AND
CONSULTING FIRM.
AND, GIANNA BERN, THE PRESIDENT
AND FOUNDER OF BROOKSHIRE
ADVISORY AND RESEARCH.
HOW NERVOUS DOES THIS UPHEAVAL
MAKE YOU ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS WITH
OIL PRICES AND WITH GAS PRICES?
>> WELL, I THINK THE MARKET HAS
INITIALLY PROBABLY OVERESTIMATED
THE IMPACT OF THIS A LITTLE BIT
IN SENSE THAT MOST OF THE IRAQ'S
OIL PRODUCTION IS IN A SMALL
AREA AROUND BASRA.
>> Ifill: IN THE SOUTHERN PART.
WHICH IS OVERWHELMINGLY
SHIITE POPULATION.
SO THE MILITANTS FIGHTING IN THE
NORTH WOULD HAVE VERY LITTLE
LOCAL SUPPORT THERE, AND THERE'S
REALLY NOWHERE FOR THEM TO HIDE
OR OPERATE.
IN THE NORTH, YOU'VE HAD THE
KIRKUK VOLUMES THAT GO OUT TO
TURKEY TO THE MEDITERRANEAN.
IT'S ABOUT 230,000 BARRELS A
DAY.
THAT'S BEEN OFFLINE SINCE EARLY
MARCH.
SO THAT LOSS HAS ALREADY
HAPPENED.
>> Ifill: GIANNA BERN, HOW MUCH
OF THIS OIL PRODUCTION IS
INTENDED FOR INTERNAL USE,
DOMESTIC USE IN IRAQ, AND HOW
MUCH OF IT IS INTENDED FOR
EXPORT?
>> WELL, THE VAST MAJORITY OF
IRAQ'S PRODUCTION IS INTENDED
FOR EXPORT.
YOU JUST MENTIONED IN YOUR --
JUST A MINUTE EARLIER IRAQ'S
PRODUCTION HAS REACHED ABOUT
3 MILLION BARRELS PER DAY AND
IT'S COME A LONG WAY FROM WHERE
ITS PRODUCTION WAS SEVERAL YEARS
AGO, SO THE VAST MAJORITY OF IT
IS A GOOD 3.3 MILLION BARRELS
FOR EXPORT.
MOST OF WHICH IS COMING OUT OF
THE SOUTHERN PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: OKAY.
SO WHERE IS THAT -- LET ME STAY
WHEN YOU FOR A MOMENT.
WHERE IS THAT GOING?
IT'S COMING FROM THE SOUTHERN
PART AND GOING TO -- NOT TO THE
U.S.
WHERE'S IT GOING?
>> ASIAN MARKETS ARE BIG
IMPORTERS, SO CHINA, JAPAN,
KOREA, YOUR ASIAN MARKETS ARE
VERY SIGNIFICANT.
EUROPEAN MARKETS ARE LIKELY TO
BE IMPACTED SHOULD THIS SPREAD
FURTHER.
I THINK THE IMPORTANT THING TO
MENTION RIGHT NOW IS THAT WHERE
IT'S AT AND WHERE CRUDE OIL
PRICES ARE AT TODAY, THE MARKET
HAS CONTAINED THIS IMPACT.
SO THE MARKET HAS ABSORBED ALL
THIS INFORMATION, ALL THIS
ACTIVITY, AND REALLY THE MARKET
HASN'T REACTED THE WAY WE MIGHT
HAVE THOUGHT SEVERAL YEARS AGO,
WHICH IS A GOOD THING, SO -- BUT
IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT HERE
THE ACTIVITY AND THE FIGHTING
HAS NOT REACHED SOME CRITICAL
AREAS.
SO FOR NOW, IT'S WAIT AND SEE.
AND THE MARKET HAS DIGESTED ALL
OF THIS INFORMATION PRETTY
NICELY IN FACT.
CRUDE OIL PRICES -- AND I THINK
THE IMPORTANT ONE TO KEEP IN
MIND HERE IS THE BRUNT, BRUNT
PRICES COST ABOUT $113 PER
BARREL TODAY.
SO WTI CLOSED AT ABOUT $16 PER
BARREL FOR TODAY.
SO BRUNT IS MUCH MORE LIKELY TO
BE IMPACTED BY ANY ACTIVITY IN
IRAQ.
>> Ifill: HOW DIFFERENT IS THIS
FROM WHAT WE SAW LAST TIME?
WE'RE GOING TO THROUGH A LOT OF
DEJA VU HERE WATCHING WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN IRAQ MILITARILY AND
INTERNALLY.
BUT IS THERE ANY DEJA VU, ANY
LESSONS TO BE LEARNED FROM WHAT
WE SAW HAPPEN BEFORE?
>> WELL, WITH THE PREVI
CRISES IN IRAQ, WITH THE
INVASION, IT WENT OFFLINE FOR
QUITE A WHILE.
BUT THAT WAS IN AN ERA WHEN THE
MARKET ALSO WAS RISING FOR OTHER
REASONS, BECAUSE THERE WAS NOT A
LOT OF NEW PRODUCTION COMING
ONLINE AND SPARE CAPACITY WAS
THINNED OUT BY THAT.
WHAT WE'VE HAD NOW IN THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS IS A SITUATION
WHERE U.S. PRODUCTION'S BEEN
RISING VERY STRONGLY AS WELL AS
THE NUMBER OF OTHER COUNTRIES
AROUND THE WORLD INCLUDING IRAQ,
AND THOSE -- IN THE SOUTHERN
IRAQ PRODUCTION, AND THAT HAS
KIND OF OFFSET THE LOSSES THAT
WE'VE HAD FROM PLITICALLY DRIVEN
EVENTS WITH IRAN SANCTIONS, WITH
THE LOSSE LOSSES FROM LIBYA ANDW
WITH THE LOSSEFR
IRAQ.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY BALANCED IT.
AND CRUDE PRICES HAVE BEEN
RELATIVELY STABLE OVER THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
>> Ifill: WHEN YOU SAY U.S.
PRODUCTION HAS BEEN ON ON THE
RISE, YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT SHALE
PRODUCTION, FRACKING PRODUCTION?
>> YEAH, WITH A LITTLE BIT OF
OFFSHORE.
>> Ifill: OUR RELIANCE
THEREFORE?
>> IT'S REALLY ONE-WORLD MARKET.
SO THE PRICE IS SET GLOBALLY.
IT DOESN'T IT'S
FUNGIBLE.
SO IT DOESN'T MATTER VERY MUCH
WHO IMPORTS FROM WHERE EVEN IF
THE U.S. WASN'T BUYING THAT MUCH
FROM IRAQ AND IT DOES BUY A
LITTLE BIT, YOU KNOW, AN OUTAGE
IN IRAQ WOULD STILL HAVE A BIG
IMPACT IF IT HAPPENED.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT ONE
AREA IN THE NORTH, GIANNA BERN,
ABOUT THE KURDISH AREA AND THE
AREA AROUND KIRKUK WHICH THE
KURDS WANT TO CONTROL.
IF THEY MAINTAIN CONTROL OVER
THESE OILFIELDS, DOES THAT
CHANGE THE FACE OF THE MARKET?
>> WELL, IT ALL DEPENDS ON HOW
THIS PLAYS OUT.
I MEAN, RIGHT NOW THIS IS ALL
HYPOTHETICAL, BUT I MEAN, THE
IMPORTANT THING TO NOTE HERE IS
THAT IRAQ IS NOW THE SECOND
GEST PRODUCER IN THE
ORGANIZATION.
SO THAT PLACES THEM IN REALLY A
VERY UNIQUE SPOT WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT WHERE THEY'VE BEEN AND HOW
THEY'VE PROGRESSED OVER THE LAST
SEVERAL YEARS.
THERE WAS A TIME WHEN IRAQ WAS
PRODUCING AS MUCH AS KUWAIT
WHICH IS ABOUT 2 MILLION BARRELS
PER DAY, AND WITH SOME VERY
SIGNIFICANT FOREIGN INVESTMENT,
THEY'VE REALLY GROWN THEIR
POSITION.
THEY'VE GROWN THEIR PRODUCTION,
AND NOW HERE WE HAVE THEM AT THE
SECOND LARGEST PRODUCER IN OPEC.
AND THAT'S A REMARKABLE STORY
FOR THEM BY ITSELF.
SO AS THEY MOVE INTO THE NORTH
AND AS THE FIGHTING AND THE
INSURGENCE BEGINS TO SPREAD,
REMAINS TO BE SEEN HOW MUCH WILL
GO OFFLINE.
BUT FOR RIGHT NOW, THEY'RE
HOLDING STEADY, AND IT LOOKS --
IT APPEARS AS THOUGH THE
GOVERNMENT IS BEING ABLE TO
CONTAIN ANY SIGNIFICANT
PRODUCTION FROM BEING ABLE TO GO
OFFLINE.
>> Ifill: GREG PRIDDY, LET ME
ASK YOU THIS QUESTION ABOUT THE
KURDISH.
IF THEY MAINTAIN CONTROL OVER
THOSE AREAS AND -- THEY HAD A
DEAL WITH BAGHDAD ABOUT HOW THEY
WOULD SHARE THIS AND THEY WOULD
BE ABLE TO GET SOME SORT OF
PAYMENT FOR IT.
NOW THEY'RE SAYING THAT DEAL IS
OFF.
IS THAT THE PRODUCTION LINE AT
ALL?
>> I THINK THE KURDS ARE THE BIG
POLITICAL WINNERS HERE BECAUSE
THIS INCREASES THEIR LEVERAGE
WITH BAGHDAD A LOT.
THE FACT THAT THEY HAVE CONTROL
OVER SECURITY AT THE MAIN KIRKUK
OILFIELDS NOW AND THEY'RE
PROBABLY GOING TO KEEP THAT,
THAT MEANS THAT GIVEN THAT THE
PIPELINE OUT TO TURKEY THAT
EXISTS RIGHT NOW IS NOT GOING TO
COME BACK OUT BECAUSE IT'S IN
ISIL HELD AREAS, IT COULD
EVENTUALLY GET THAT VOLUME BACK
ONLINE, AND THAT DEFINITELY ADDS
TO THEIR NEGOTIATING LEVERAGE IN
DEALING WITH BAGHDAD ON THEIR
OWN EXPORTS.
SO THERE'S NO GUARANTEES THERE,
BUT THAT MAKES IT MORE LIKELY
THAT YOU WOULD SEE SOME SORT OF
A DEAL, BECAUSE BAGHDAD NEEDS
THEM AT THIS POINT.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU BOTH
ONE FINAL QUESTION ABOUT THE
FUTURE.
GIANNA BERN, DOES THE TRAJECTORY
THAT YOU SEE HERE WITH THE
UPHEAVAL, WITH THE DISRUPTIONS,
DOES DOES IT CHANGE THE PATH
THAT IRAQ WAS ON TO GREATER --
EVEN GREATER OIL PRODUCTION?
THERE WERE HIGH HOPES AND HIGH
NUMBERS ATTACHED TO THE
POTENTIAL FOR THE FUTURE.
>> I THINK FOR THE MOMENT, IT
DEFINITELY BRINGS THAT BACK INTO
QUESTION, HOW MUCH THEY CAN
REALLY INCREASE GIVEN THE
CURRENT DYNAMICS IN THE COUNTRY
AND THE INSTABILITY, SO, YES, I
THINK IT WILL -- WE ALL HAVE TO
ASK, WHERE DO THEY GO FROM HERE?
AND ARE THEY ABLE TO INCREASE
PRODUCTION, HOLD IT STEADY?
AND I THINK IF THEY WERE ABLE TO
HOLD IT STEADY, IT WOULD
ACTUALLY BE -- THAT MAY BE AS
GOOD AS WE COULD HOPE FOR THE
MOMENT.
>> Ifill: GREG PRIDDY, IS THERE
A LONG-TERM CONCERN?
>> THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF A
CHILLING IMPACT ON THE
WILLINGNESS OF COMPANIES TO GO
INTO SOUTHERN IRAQ, BUT THE
SECURITY SITUATION THERE, WE
DON'T THINK IT'S GOING TO BE
PROHIBITIVE.
NOT ONLY DO WE THINK THAT THE
OIL IS NOT GOING TO GO OFFLINE
IMMEDIATELY AS A DISRUPTION
EVENT, BUT THERE'S STILL GOING
TO BE ONGOING ACTIVITY THERE.
SO LUKE OIL, FOR EXAMPLE, IS
BRINGING ON A LOT OF NEW
PRODUCTION IN THE SOUTH THIS
YEAR.
AND I THINK PRODUCTION IF
THERE'S NOT A BIG DISRUPTION
EVENT, PRODUCTION COULD ACTUALLY
END THE YEAR UP AND YOU COULD
SEE A LITTLE BIT OF GROWTH IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS, NOT ANYWHERE
AS CLOSE AS THE GOVERNMENT OF
IRAQ IS PREDICTING.
>> Ifill: GREG PRIDDY AND GIANNA
BERN.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW TO CAMBODIA AND
AN INSIDE LOOK AT EFFORTS BY
U.S. SCIENTISTS TO SAVE A
CRITICAL WATER SYSTEM.
THIS REPORT, PREPARED BY
JOURNALISTS CHRIS BERDICK AND
STEVE SAPIENZA AND NARRATED BY
OUR HARI SREENIVASAN WAS
PRODUCED IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
PULITZER CENTER ON CRISIS
REPORTING.
Reporter: ON CAMBODIA'S LAKE
LAKE TONLE SAP, IN ONE OF THE
MOST PRODUCTIVE FRESH WATER
ECOSYSTEMS IN THE WORLD.
THIS FISHERMAN STARTS HIS DAY
MUCH LIKE HIS NEIGHBORS, WITH
FAMILY BREAKFAST.
THEN THE FATHER OF FIVE PADDLES
A NEARBY MAN GROVE TO REACH THE
GILNET HE SET THE NIGHT BEFORE.
HE AND OTHERS CATCH ABOUT
350,000 TONS OF FISH FROM THIS
LAKE EVERY YEAR, A VITAL
RESOURCE IN A COUNTRY WHERE 75%
OF THE PROTEIN PEOPLE EAT IS
FISH.
AT A NEARBY FISH LANDING,
WORKERS SORT THE DAY'S CATCH.
MOST OF THE HAUL IS MINNOWS
KNOWN AS MONEY FISH WHICH GO FOR
25 TO 50 CENTS A KILOGRAM.
THEY'RE USED TO MAKE FERMENTED
FISH PASTE, A STAPLE IN
CAMBODIAN COOKING.
THE IMPORTANCE OF FISH IS DEEPLY
ROOTED IN THE CAMBODIAN CULTURE.
CHISELED INTO THE MEDIEVAL
TEMPLE ARE MANY OF THE SAME FISH
THAT ARE HARVESTED FROM THE
TONLE SAP TODAY.
THE ASTOUNDING NUMBER AND
DIVERSITY OF FISH HERE HAS LONG
ATTRACTED RESEARCHERS LIKE
AMERICAN BIOLOGIST LES KAUFMAN.
>> I'VE NEVER SEEN THE COLOR
PATTERN LIKE THIS.
>> Reporter: HE ENJOYS EVERY
SECOND HE SPENDS ON THE WATER.
>> HEY.
(LAUGHTER).
>> Reporter: THERE ARE PLENTY OF
SMALL FISH AT THIS LANDING, BUT
WHAT WORRIES KAUFMAN IS WHAT HE
DOES NOT SEE.
>> THIS IS THE MOST PRODUCTIVE
INLAND FISHERY IN THE WHOLE
WORLD.
AND YET WE'VE SEEN MOST OF THE
LARGE FISH DISAPPEAR FROM THE
LAKE.
THE GIANT CATFISH, THE GIANT
STINGRAY, THE GIANT NIGHT FISH,
ALL THESE FISH ARE DISAPPEARING.
AND THAT'S AN OBVIOUS SIGN THAT
FISH SOMETHING TAKING A TO.
>> Reporter: TO PROTECT THE
FISHERY, THE LAKE IS DIVIDED
INTO HUNDREDS OF
COMMUNITY-MANAGED FISHERIES
ALONG WITH NEWLY FORMED
CONSERVATION AREAS.
BUT ILLEGAL FISHING IS COMMON
AND MOST VILLAGES LACK THE
RESOURCES TO STOP IT.
>> VILLAGERS HERE FISHING WITH
NETS USE ABOUT 200 METERS BUT
THE OUTSIDERS WHO COME HERE USE
BIGGER NETS AND CATCH LOTS OF
FISH.
>> Reporter: AT THE END OF MAO'S
VILLAGE, RANGERS READY BOATS TO
PATROL THE NEARBY CONSERVATION
AREA.
>> FROM JANUAO
FEBRUARY, WE CONFISCATED FISHING
NETS, SOME 8,860 METERS AND WE
DESTROYED THEM.
>> Reporter: OUT ON THE LAKE,
THE PATROL BOAT PICKS UP SPEED.
THE RANGERS HAVE SPOTTED SOME
FISHERMEN WHO HAVE SLIPPED INTO
THE RESERVE.
THEIR BOAT IS INTERCEPTED IN
SEARCH FOR ILLEGAL FISHING GEAR.
THE NETS ARE LEGAL, SO THE
RANGERS SIMPLY ESCORT THEM OUT
OF THE RESERVE.
>> WE TOOK THEM TO OUR OFFICE
AND MADE A REPORT.
INFORMING THEM ABOUT FISHING
LEGALLY OUTSIDE THE PRESERVATION
AREA.
>> Reporter: OVERFISHING IS JUST
ONE THREAT TO THE TONLE SAP.
CAMBODIA IS A RAPIDLY DEVELOPING
NATION.
IT HAS ENORMOUS PROMISE,
TREMENDOUS POTENTIAL, BUT THE
PROBLEM IS THAT IT'S DEVELOPINGT
ACKNOWLEDGES THE TRADE-OFFS.
>> Reporter: OFTEN CALLED THE
BEATING HEART OF CAMBODIA THE
TONLE SAP IS POWERED BY A
MASSIVE ANNUAL PULSE OF WATER,
THRODING AND RECEDING IN THE
LOWER RIVER BASIN TO WHICH IT'S
CONNECTED BY THE TONLE SAP
RIVER.
TODAY, THE FLOODED FORESTS AND
NURSERY FOR YOUNG FISH ARE BEING
CUT DOWN FOR COOKING FUEL AND
FARMLAND.
A CHANGE IN CLIMATE WILL LIKELY
BRING MORE EXTREMES OF FLOOD AND
DROUGHT AND SCIENTISTS WORRY
THAT PLANS TO BUILD MORE THAN
100 HYDROPOWER DAMS UPSTREAM ON
THE MA KONG, DAMS THAT WOULD
GENERATE POWER FOR THE GROWING
ECONOMIES FOR THE REGION WOULD
CUT OFF BOTH THE FLOOD PULSE AND
FISH MIGRATION.
KAUFMAN AND AN INTERNATIONAL
GROUP OF SCIENTISTS ARE WORKING
WITH LOCAL FISHERMEN AND
CAMBODIAN AUTHORITIES TO SOLVE
THIS PUZZLE.
KAUFMAN'S MODELING WORK BEGAN
FIVE YEARS AGO WITH THE COASTAL
EKEY SYSTEMS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
NOW HE AND HIS COLLEAGUES ARE IN
CAMBODIA TO DEVELOP A MASSIVE
DYNAMIC COMPUTER MODEL OF THE
LAKE'S ECOSYSTEM.
>> WE'VE BEEN WORKING TOGETHER
TO TRY AND GET A BIG PICTURE
VIEW OF THE POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVE
FUTURES FOR THE TONLE SAP AND
THE WIDER LOWER MEKONG.
>> Reporter: LOCAL FISHERMEN ARE
ALSO PART OF THE EFFORT.
HE WORKS PART TIME FOR THE NGO
INTERNATIONAL, THE HEALTH OF THE
LAKE.
HE COLLECTS FISH FROM SAMPLING
NETS, RECORDS THE SPECIES, SIZE
AND WEIGHT AND SNIPS OFF A BIT
OF THE TAIL FOR DNA ANALYSIS.
THE SAMPLES COLLECTED BY MAO AND
OTHERS WILL HELP THE RESEARCHERS
CONSTRUCT A CONNOLLY SAP FOOD
REG WHICH WILL BECOME THE BASIS
FOR ALGORITHMS OF WHAT EATS WHAT
IN THE ECOSYSTEM MODEL.
KAUFMAN BELIEVES ECOSYSTEMS ARE
NETWORKS OF RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN LIVING THINGS AND THE
HABITAT THEY SHARE THAT INCLUDES
HUMANS WHO ARE A PART OF THE
ECOSYSTEM AND PROFIT FROM ITS
CONTINUED HEALTH.
>> SO WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS
TREAD A CENTRAL PATH WHERE WE
DON'T FORGET THAT PRESERVING THE
WEALTH OF CREATION IS CRITICAL
TO HUMAN SURVIVAL IN THE LONG
TERM AND, AT THE SAME TIME, WE
DON'T FORGET THAT FOOD AND JOBS
IMMEDIATELY ARE WHAT PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING FOR RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: VILLAGERS WHO LIVE
IN THE FLOOD ZONES OF PROPOSED
HYDROPOWERED PROJECTS ARE
ALREADY FACING TOUGH CHOICES.
AS DESIGNED, ONE NEW DAM WILL BE
ALMOST 250 FEET HIGH, AND ITS
RESERVOIR WILL FLOOD DOZENS OF
VILLAGES FORCING NEARLY 5,000
PEOPLE TO RESETTLE.
DENSE BROADLY FOREST ONCE
FLANKED THIS ROAD TO THE BALL
SPAIN ONE OF THEVISMS THAT WILL
BE UNDERWATER WHEN THE DAM IS
BUILT.
THIS AREA WAS RECENTLY CLEARCUT
FOR A RUBBER TREE PLANTATION.
VILLAGERS LIKE 61-YEAR-OLD
TASAN HAVE BEEN ASKED TO MOVE IN
EXCHANGE FOR COMPENSATION, BUT
THEY'RE RESISTING.
DURING THE TERROR-FILLED REIGN,
THEIR VILLAGE WAS ORDERED AT
GUNPOINT WHERE THEY BECAME
FORCED LABOR, PLANTING RICE AND
DIGGING IRRIGATION CANALS.
>> DURING THE POL POT REGIME IN
1976, WE WERE EVACUATED TO THIS
NORTHEAST REGION.
>> Reporter: SHE WAS ASKED ABOUT
MOVING AGAIN TO MAKE WAY FOR THE
DAM.
>> I THINK I WOULD NOT BE ALIVE
IF THEY MOVED ME TO A NEW
LOCATION.
I DO NOT THINK I WOULD SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: VILLAGERS WHO LIVE
UPSTREAM FROM THE PROPOSEDM
DO NOT FACE RELOCATION.
INSTEAD, THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT
FLOODING AND DECLINING FISH
STOCKS.
>> RIGHT NOW WE HAVE LOTS OF
BUT IF THEY BLOCK THE RIVER WITH
THE DAM, FISH WILL NOT BE ABLE
TO MIGRATE HERE.
>> Reporter: CAMBODIA NEEDS MORE
POWER TO FUEL ITS EMERGING
ECONOMY AND EASE WIDESPREAD
POVERTY.
BUT IT ALSO NEEDS THE FISH,
CLEAN WATER, AND THE
BIODIVERSITY OF THE TONLE SAP.
>> BY SELECTING ONE DAM SITE
OVER ANOTHER, IT CAN MAKE AN
ENORMOUS DIFFERENCE IN THE
ABILITY OF THE FISHERS TO SPAWN,
AND THAT COULD BE 30 OR 40% OF
THE FISH FOR THE WHOLE FUTURE
OUT OF TONLE SAP.
>> Reporter: THERE'S NO
GUARANTEE OF SUCCESS.
BUT AS THE PLANET WARMS, THE
DAMS RISE AND MORE FISH VANISH.
KAUFMAN AND HIS COLLEAGUES ALSO
BELIEVE THE TIME FOR WISE
DECISIONS IS NOW.
TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT THE
FUTURE OF LAKE TONLE SAP, VISIT
OUR WEBSITE WHERE YOU CAN FIND
LINKS TO CHRIS BERDICK'S
ARTICLES ON THE WATER SYSTEM FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES AND VIRGINIA
REVIEW QUARTERLY.
>> Ifill: EVEN IN THE AFTERMATH
OF THE RESIGNATION OF ITS
CABINET SECRETARY, SCRUTINY
CONTINUES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT.
>> Reporter: FOR WEEKS THE V.A.
HAS BEEN ROCKED BY REPORTS THAT
SCHEDULING CLERKS WERE FORCED TO
FALSIFY RECORDS ABOUT HOW LONG
PATIENTS HAD TO WAIT FOR
APPOINTMENTS.
THE DEPARTMENT'S OWN AUDITS
FOUND SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
LAST MONTH, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ACCEPTED SECRETARY ERIC
SHINSEKI'S RESIGNATION.
THIS WEEK SAW SEVERAL NEW
DEVELOPMENTS, INCLUDING
ACCUSATIONS FROM A WHISTLE-
BLOWER AT THE V.A. HOSPITAL IN
PHOENIX.
TO BRING US UP TO DATE, WE TURN
TO DENNIS WAGNER.
AN INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER WITH
"THE ARIZONA REPUBLIC" AND
"U.S.A. TODAY."
HE BROKE THE ORGINAL STORY.
DENNIS, THIS NEW WHISTLE-BLOWER,
PAULINE DEWENTER, SAYS SHE KEPT
A SECRET LIST OF VETERANS WHO
WERE WAITING MONTHS FOR
TREATMENT.
TELL US ABOUT THAT.
>> BASICALLY WHAT SHE SAID WAS
THEY DIDN'T -- THEY WEREN'T ABLE
TO GET PEOPLE IN TO SEE THE
DEPOSITION WITHIN A CERTAIN
PRESCRIBED PERIOD OF TIME, SO
RATHER THAN PUT THEM ON THE
LINK, THE ACTUAL OFFICIAL LIST,
SHE WOULD TAKE SCREENSHOTS OF
THE APPOINTMENT REQUESTS THAT
WEREN'T RETAINED IN THE
COMPUTER, PLACE THEM IN HER DESK
DRAWER AND HOLD THEM THERE UNTIL
THEY COULD GET AN APPOINTMENT
WITHIN THE PRESCRIBED TIME
PERIOD.
>> THERE HAS ALWAYS BEEN THIS
ISSUE ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT
PATIENTS DIED WHILE THEY WERE
WAITING FOR TREATMENT.
SHE'S SUGGESTING THAT RECORDS
WERE TAMPERED WITH TO MAKE
KNOWING THAT MORE DIFFICULT?
>> WHAT SHE SAYS IS AFTER SHE
SPOKE WITH THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S OFFICE AND TOLD THEM
WHAT SHE KNEW AND PROVIDED
DOCUMENTATION WITH THEM, THERE
WAS A CHECK OF THE ELECTRONIC
SYSTEM.
AND IN AT LEAST SIX OR SEVEN
CASES, SHE HAD TYPED IN WHERE IT
ASKED WHY THIS APPOINTMENT
WASN'T KEPT BECAUSE THE
APPOINTMENT WAS CANCELED, WHY IT
WASN'T KEPD KEPT.
SHE TYPED IN DECEASED.
WHAT SHE SAID WAS THAT WAS
REMOVED.
THE WORDS WRITTEN IN ERROR OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT WAS PLACED
IN THE SLOT WHERE THE
DISPOSITION WAS SUPPOSED TO BE,
AND THEN THERE WAS ANOTHER
DISPOSITION WHICH SAID NO LONGER
NEEDED, MEANING THE APPOINTMENT
WAS NO LONGER NEEDED.
WHICH TURNED OUT TO BE TRUE
BECAUSE THEN THE WHOLE THING
STARTED WHEN SHE WOULD ACTUALLY
CALL PATIENTS TO TELL THEM THAT
THEIR APPOINTMENT TIME WAS
AVAILABLE AND THE FAMILY MEMBERS
WOULD SAY, SORRY, YOU'RE TOO
LATE.
>> Brown: WHAT YOU CAN TELL US
ABOUT HER?
WHAT DOES SHE SAY ABOUT HER OWN
EXPERIENCE?
>> WELL, SHE JUST -- JUST
EMERGED AS A PUBLIC
WHISTLEBLOWER ALTHOUGH SHE'S
BEEN SPEAKING TO THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL FOR SOME TIME NOW.
SO FAR, I HAVE NOT HEARD
ANYTHING IN TERMS OF
RETALIATION.
IN FACT, I'VE HEARD THROUGH
CHANNELS A THE V.A. THAT THEY'RE
CONFIRMING WHAT SHE SAID AND NOT
DISPUTING ANY OF IT.
>> Brown: THERE WAS ALSO A
SECOND WHISTLEBLOWER THAT CAME
FORWARD THIS WEEK, K.J. SLOAN.
SHE SAYS SHE RAISED CONCERNS
ABOUT WHAT WAS GOING ON AND WAS
FIRED FROM HER JOB.
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US?
>> BLACK IN JULY, AN EMPLOYEE AT
THE V.A. SENT AN EMAIL TO
SEVERAL TOP EXECUTIVES SAYING,
HEY, THE WAY WE ARE REPORTING
THAT WE'RE DRAMATICALLY
IMPROVING THE WAIT TIME SLOTS
HERE IS COMPLETELY INACCURATE,
AND HE SAID IT'S UNETHICAL, AND
IT'S A DISSERVE SERVICE TO VETE.
AND THAT EMAIL PROMPTED ETHICS
CONSULTATION, A REVIEW PANEL
LOOKS AT THE ETHICS OF IT.
K.J. SLOAN WAS THE HEAD OF THIS
ETHICS REVIEW PANEL.
SHE ISSUED A REPORT THAT
BASICALLY SAID THE WAY WE'RE
DOING THIS -- THESE REPORTS OF
DATA ON WAIT TIMES IS A SHAM,
AND AFTER SHE -- AND MADE SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS.
WHAT SHE SAYS IS NONE OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS WERE CARRIED
OUT.
WHAT DID CHANGE WAS SHE WAS
DISMISSED AS THE ETHICS
COORDINATOR.
>> Brown: NOW, ALSO THIS WEEK,
THE U.S. OFFICE OF SPECIAL
COUNCIL RELEASED A REPORT
CRITICIZING THE V.A. BUT ALSO
ITS INVESTIGATIVE OFFICER FOR
NOT TAKING SERIOUSLY THE
INTERNAL COMPLAINTS, PROBABLY OF
THE VERY KIND THAT WE'VE JUST
BEEN HEARING ABOUT.
>> RIGHT.
NOW, THERE'S A COUPLE OF
DIFFERENT LEVELS.
FIRST OF ALL, YOU'VE GOT THE
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
HAD DONE QUITE A NUMBER OF
INVESTIGATIONS AND FOUND THIS
WAIT TIME PROBLEM EXISTED AND
THEN IT'S COME POUNDED BY THE --
COMPOUNDED BY THE OFFICE OF
MEDICAL INSPECTOR WHICH LOOKS AT
COMPLAINTS WITHIN THE V.A. THAT
ARE SAID TO DIRECTLY IMPLICATE
THE HEALTH AND WELL-BEING OF
PATIENTS.
AND THEY WERE LOOKING AT THESE
AND COMING BACK WITH REPORTS
THAT BASICALLY SAID, WELL, WE
CAN'T PROVE FOR A FACT THAT THE
PATIENT'S DEATH OR ILLNESS OR
WHATEVER IT WAS WAS DIRECTLY
RELATED TO THIS PROBLEM.
WE'RE FINDING AN UNFOUNDED
COMPLAINT OR SOMETHING TO THAT
EFFECT.
AND THE OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL
COUNCIL'S BASICALLY RAISED A RED
FLAG ON THAT AND DID SO IN A
LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT.
>> Brown: SO LET ME JUST ASK YOU
IN OUR LAST MINUTE, IN THE
MEANTIME, SINCE THE SCANDAL HAS
COME TO LIGHT, WE KNOW OUR
VETERANS ARE GETTING THE CARE
THEY NEED, THAT'S SOMETHING THE
V.A. SAID WOULD START TO HAPPEN.
>> I THINK THERE MAY BE TRENDS
IN THAT DIRECTION.
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT AS A
JOURNALIST RELYING ON CALLS FROM
VETERANS AND CALLS FROM
EMPLOYEES, YOU'RE STUCK WITH
ANECT TOTAL EVIDENCE.
THERE ARE SOME AUDIT REVIEWS
COMING OUT AND SOME NUMBERS
COMING OUT FROM V.A. SHOWING
THAT MANY OF THE PATIENTS WHO
WERE ON SECRET WAITING LISTS ARE
NOT -- OR SIDETRACKED OFF THE
SYSTEM HAVE BEEN CONTACTED AND
HAD APPOINTMENTS SET UP.
A DRAMATIC NUMBER OF THEM
HAD THAT ACCORDING TO THE V.A.
THE PROBLEM THE V. AT HAS AT
THIS POINT IS NO ONE'S SURE WHEN
ITS CREDIBILITY IS VALID.
>> Brown: AND ARE YOU EXPECTING
TO HEAR FROM MORE WHISTLEBLOWERS
IN COMING DAYS AND WEEKS, MORE
TO COME?
>> FIVE MINUTES BEFORE I WALKED
INTO THIS ROOM, I GOT A CALL
FROM A WHISTLEBLOWER.
>> Brown: AND ARE YOU ABLE TO
TELL US ANYTHING ABOUT WHAT YOU
JUST HEARD?
>> NOT THE SPECIFICS, BUT IN
GENERAL, THIS WAS AN INDIVIDUAL
WHO'S EMPLOYED BY THE V.A. IN
ARIZONA WHO CALLED ME TO TELL ME
THAT WHERE HE WORKS, THEY ARE
TELLING HIM TO BASICALLY KEEP
PATIENTS OFTEN THE ELECTRONIC
WAITING LIST OR TO NOT FIND THEM
APPOINTMENTS AT ALL BECAUSE THEY
ARE SIMPLY OVERLOADED.
THEY DON'T HAVE ENOUGH
PHYSICIANS TO HANDLE FIRST-TIME
PRIMARY CARE APPOINTMENTS AT HIS
CLINIC, AND HE'S NOT BEEN GIVEN
ANY GUIDANCE ON WHAT TO DO WITH
THESE PATIENTS.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, DENNIS
WAGNER.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Woodruff: AN IMPORTANT MOMENT
FOR THE U.S. SOCCER TEAM TODAY.
IT ADVANCED TO THE KNOCKOUT
ROUND OF 16 TEAMS IN THE WORLD
CUP.
THAT'S JUST THE FIRST TIME THE
U.S. MEN'S TEAM HAS EVER DONE
THAT IN SUCCESSIVE CUPS BUT IT
CAME ONLY AFTER A BIG ASSIST
FROM PORTUGAL.
IN CITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
THEY CHEERED ON THE U.S. TEAM
AGAINST GERMANY.
FROM CHICAGO, TO NEW YORK, TO
SEATTLE, THOUSANDS OF FANS TOOK
A CUE FROM U.S. COACH JURGEN
KLINSMANN.
THE TEAM TWEETED A TONGUE-IN-
CHEEK NOTE FROM HIM, EXCUSING
EMPLOYEES FROM WORK AND
IMPLORING BOSSES TO BE
UNDERSTANDING AND EVEN TO TAKE
THE DAY OFF THEMSELVES TO WATCH.
FOR MANY, AT THIS OUTDOOR WATCH
PARTY IN WASHINGTON, D.C. THAT
WAS MORE THAN ENOUGH
ENCOURAGEMENT TO CHUCK WORK FOR
THE DAY.
>> I DON'T EVEN KNOW IF THEY
KNOW I'M HERE, BUT I DON'T CARE.
GO UNITED STATES!
>> Reporter: INDEED, THE WORLD
CUP HAS GENERATED MUCH MORE BUZZ
IN THE U.S. THAN EVER BEFORE,
WITH RECORD TV RATINGS.
EVEN TODAY'S ONE-NIL LOSS TO
GERMANY PROVED ONLY A MOMENTARY
DISAPPOINTMENT.
THANKS TO PORTUGAL'S WIN OVER
GHANA, THE U.S. ADVANCED ANYWAY,
TO THE KNOCKOUT ROUND OF 16
TEAMS.
THE AMERICANS PLAY AGAIN NEXT
TUESDAY.
>> Woodruff: MORE ON THIS MOMENT
FOR THE AMERICAN TEAM AND THE
WORLD CUP FEVER AMONG FANS IN
THE U.S.
MATT FUTTERMAN WAS AT THE MATCH
AND JOINS US FROM RECIFE,
BRAZIL.
THE AMERICANS ADVANCED, BUT THEY
DID LOSE TO GERMANY TODAY.
WHAT HAPPENED?
>> WELL, IT TH IS JUST ONE OF
THOSE WEIRD THINGS IN SPORTS.
TO BE FRANK, THIS HAS BEEN ONE
OF THE WEIRDEST DAYS IN SPORTS.
THERE ARE -- THERE WERE
FLOOD-LIKE RAINS HERE IN BRAZIL.
THE AMERICANS PLAYED THIS GAME
AGAINST GERMANY.
NOBODY WAS ALLOWED TO WARM UP ON
THE FIELD BECAUSE IT WAS SO
FLOODED, AND THEY THOUGHT IT WAS
GOING TO GET DAMAGED.
THEY CAME OUT.
THEY HELD ON FOR A 1-0 LOSS, BUT
THIS IS A SITUATION IN
INTERNATIONAL SOCCER WHERE A
LOSS IS ALMOST AS GOOD AS A WIN.
THEY'RE MOVINGEN TO THE KNOCKOUT
ROUND.
THE FINAL 16.
THAT'S THE FIRST GOAL THAT
EVERY TEAM THAT COMES TO THE
WORLD CUP WANTS TO ACCOMPLISH.
THEY PULLED THAT OFF.
>> Woodruff: SO EXPLAIN QUICKLY
FOR THOSE WHO DON'T FOLLOW
SOCCER WHY THEY MOVE ON.
>> THEY MOVE ON BECAUSE IN WORLD
CUP SOCCER, YOU PLAY A ROUND
ROBIN IN YOUR GROUP.
YOU GET THREE POINTS FOR A WIN,
ONE POINT FOR A DRAW, NO POINTS
FOR A LOSS.
THEY HAD A WIN AND A DRAW, THAT
GAVE THEM FOUR POINTS.
THEY -- THAT TIED THEM WITH
PORTGAL FOR SECOND PLACE.
BUT THEY HAD A BETTER GOAL
DIFFERENTIAL THAN PORTUGAL,
WHICH GOT SLAUGHTERED IN ITS
FIRST GAME BY GERMANY, 4-0.
TODAY THE PORTUGUESE WON 2-1.
THAT ELIMINATED GHANA.
AND IT TIED THEM WITH THE U.S.,
BUT THE U.S. HAD A BETTER GOAL
DIFFERENTIAL.
SO THE U.S. MOVES ON TO SALVADOR
TO PLAY WHAT MIGHT BE BELGIUM,
WHAT MIGHT BE ALGERIA.
>> Woodruff: TALK ABOUT THIS
TEAM, THIS U.S. TEAM.
WHAT DO YOU SEE IN THEM?
HOW ARE THEY EVOLVING?
>> WELL, THEY ARE EVOLVING.
THEY STOOD TOE TO TOE WITH
GERMANY.
THEY DIDN'T DOMINATE THE GAME IN
ANY WAY.
IN FACT, THEY GOT DOMINATED.
BUT WHEN YOU LOOKED UP AT THE
END OF THE DAY, THEY WERE ONLY A
GOAL -- THEY WERE ONLY A GOAL
DOWN.
AND THEY ACTUALLY NEARLY SCORED
TO TIE IT UP IN THE FINAL
SECONDS.
AND THE INTERESTING THING IS
THEY'VE MOVED ON BUT THEY'RE
REALLY NOT SATISFIED.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEY CAN DO MORE.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEY CAN WIN MORE
GAMES, AND THEY'RE FIGHTING FOR
RESPECT.
THIS IS THE UNITED STATES.
IT'S NOT REALLY HISTORICALLY A
GREAT SOCCER COUNTRY.
THEY WANT TO MAKE A NAME FOR
THEMSELVES.
THEY WANT TO DO WHAT THEY'VE
DONE THE LAST FEW DAYS, WHICH IS
GO TOE TO TOE WITH THE BEST
TEAMS IN THE WORLD.
THEY THINK THEY CAN.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU THINK
MAKING THE DIFFERENCE?
YOU'VE SAID IT TWICE.
THEY'VE GONE TOE TO TOE.
WHAT'S GIVING THEM THE
CONFIDENCE?
WHAT'S CHANGED?
>> JUDY, I THINK THE BIGGEST
CHANGE IS THEIR COACH, JURGEN
KLINSMANN, WHO WAS A SUPERSTAR
FOR GERMANY IN HIS PLAYING
CAREER.
HE BECAME THE COACH OF GERMANY
FOR THE 2006 WORLD CUP, AND HE
REALLY REVOLUTIONIZED THE WAY
GERMANY PLAYS SOCK HE.
THEY USED TO BE VERY DEFENSIVE.
NOW THEY'RE VERY OFFENSIVE
MINDED.
AND HE TOOK ON THE U.S. JOB IN
2011 AND HE REALLY CHALLENGED
THESE PLAYERS TO SORT OF GET TO
THE NEXT LEVEL, AS HE ALWAYS
TELLS THEM.
HE'S NEVER SATISFIED WITH WHAT
THEY'VE DONE.
NO SOONER HAD THEY QUALIFIED FOR
THE KNOCKOUT ROUND, THEN HE'S
TELLING THEM, THAT'S FINE, BUT
NOW THE TOURNAMENT REALLY
BEGINS.
THAT'S KIND OF GOING TO BE A BIT
OF A SHOCK TO MOST AMERICAN
SPORTS FANS, MOST AMERICAN
SOCCER FANS WHO HAVE BEEN ON
TOOTH AND NAIL THE LAST TEN DAYS
WATCHING THIS TEAM.
BUT IN KLINSMANN'S MIND, HE'S A
WORLD CHAMPION.
THIS ISN'T WHAT HE CAME HERE
FOR.
THIS ISN'T WHAT YOU PLAY THE
GAME FOR, JUST TO QUALIFIFOR THE
NEXT ROUND.
YOU PLAY TO PLAY AGAINST THE
BEST TEAMS ON THE BIGGEST STAGE
IN THE WORLD.
>> Woodruff: THERE'S ALSO AN
EVOLUTION AMONG THE FANS, MATT
FUTTERMAN.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THE AMERICANS
WHO ARE THERE TO WATCH THESE
GAMES?
>> THERE WAS A LOT OF AMERICANS
WHO CAME HERE TO -- WHO
ACTUALLY COULDN'T GET TO THE
GAME BECAUSE THE FLOODING WAS SO
BAD.
SOME OF THE PLAYERS' FAMILIES
DIDN'T MAKE IT TO THE GAME
APPARENTLY.
BUT THE ONES WHO DID GET HERE --
AND THERE WERE THOUSANDS WHO DID
GET HERE -- THEY'RE LOUD.
THERE ARE SCREAMS OF USA, USA
THROUGHOUT THE STADIUM.
NOT QUITE AS LOUD AS THE SCREAMS
OF THE GERMANS, BUT THEN AGAIN
THEY WERE WINNING.
BUT WHEN IT WAS ALL OVER, IT WAS
A REAL CELEBRATION BY A SORT OF
NUMBER OF PEOPLE THAT YOU JUST
WOULDN'T HAVE SEEN FROM THE U.S.
20 YEARS AGO.
>> Woodruff: AND A LOT OF
EXCITEMENT AMONG FANS HERE IN
THE U.S.
PEOPLE AS WE JUST SAW REALLY DID
TAKE OFF FROM WORK TO WATCH THIS
GAME TODAY.
DO YOU THINK THIS IS THE KIND OF
EXCITEMENT THAT LASTS, THAT'S
>> I THINK IT'S SUSTAINABLE AS
LONG AS THIS TEAM KEEPS WINNING.
JURGEN KLINSMANN HAS A CONTRACT
TILL 2018.
I THINK WHATEVER HAPPENS NOW
THAT THEY GOT OUT OF THIS
SO-CALLED GROUP OF DEATH WHICH
GERMANY, THE SECOND-RANKED TEAM
IN THE WORLD, PORTUGAL, THE
FOURTH-RANKED TEAM IN THE WORLD,
AND GHANA, PROBABLY THE BEST
TEAM IN AFRICA, IS, YOU KNOW, IS
THEY NEED TO JUST -- THEY NEED
TO GIVE IT A GOOD FIGHT AND SHOW
THAT THEY ARE AS GOOD AS SOME OF
THESE GREAT TEAMS.
AND IF THEY CAN DO THAT AND HOLD
THEIR HEADS HIGH, I THINK PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO BE PAYING ATTENTION
TO THIS SPORT FOR A LIGHTNING
TIME TO COME.
>> Woodruff: ON TO THE NEXT ONE.
MATT FUTER MEN COVERING THE
WORLD CUP FOR THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL TODAY IN RECIFE, BRAZIL.
THANK YOU.
>> THANKS, JUDY.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT,
BECOMING AN AMERICAN BECOMING A
POET AND NOW A PULITZER-PRIZE
WINNER.
JEFFREY BROWN IS BACK WITH THE
STORY.
Reporter: FIRST I HAD THREE
APOCALYPTIC VISIONS.
EACH MORE TERRIBLE THAN THE
LAST.
THE GRAVES OPEN AND THE SEA
RISES TO KILL US A
THEN THE DOORBELL RANG, AND I
WENT DOWNSTAIRS AND SIGNED FOR
TWO PACKAGES.
ONE JUST AN ENVELOPE BUT THE
OTHER LONG AND BULKY, DIFFICULT
TO MANAGE.
BOTH FOR MY NEIGHBOR GUS.
>> Reporter: THE FANTASTIC AND
THE EVERY DAY.
VIJAY SESHADRI USES DISPARATE
WORLDS TOGETHER IN THE BEGINNING
OF HIS POEM "THIS MORNING."
IT'S PART OF THE COLLECTION
"THREE SECTIONS" WHICH WON HIM
THIS YEAR'S PULITZER PRIZE FOR
POTTERY.
FOR A QUARTER CENTURY, HIS POEMS
HAVE APPEARED IN THE PAGES OF
"THE NEW YORKER" MAGAZINE WHERE
HE ONCE SERVED AS A COPY ED OR
IT.
-- EDITOR FOR.
OF THAT TIME HE'S ALSO TAUGHT AT
SARA LAWRENCE COLLEGE IN
BRONXVILLE, NEW YORK.
IN FACT, NEW YORK, ESPECIALLY
THE BROOKLYN NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE
SESHADRI'S LIVED FOR NEARLY 30
YEARS SERVES AS THE SETTING FOR.
OF HIS WRIGHT.
>> I'M ALWAYS KIND OF LOOKING AT
THINGS AND I MEAN, DETAIL
SERVES TWO FUNCTIONS IN POETRY,
RIGHT?
IT KIND OF -- IT ALLOWS TO YOU
CREATE A WORLD AND THAT'S WHAT'S
IMPORTANT.
YOU HAVE TO KIND OF RE-CREATE
THE WORLD.
AND THAT'S AN OLD RHETORICAL
OBLIGATION OF ALL WRITERS.
>> Reporter: WHAT AM I SEEING
HERE?
WHAT AM I OBSERVING?
GO WHAT ARE YOU OBSERVING?
>> Reporter: FOR A POET, THE
DETAILS OF THE WORLD ARE
SUFFICIENT IN AND OF THEMSELVES.
JUST THE BEAUTY OF THE PHYSICAL
WORLD.
>> Reporter: THAT WORLD WASN'T
ALWAYS THE CITY OF NEW YORK.
SESHADRI WAS BORN IN INDIA IN
1954.
HIS FAMILY IMMIGRATED TO THE
U.S. WHEN HE WAS 5 YEARS OLD SO
THAT HIS FATHER COULD PURSUE A
POST-DOCTORATE FELLOWSHIP IN
CHEMISTRY, FIRST IN CANADA AND
THEN AT OHIO STATE.
>> IT WAS THE AMERICA OF THE
'60s, AND THE NEW ASIAN
IMMIGRANTS TENDED TO BE
CLUSTERED AROUND ACADEMIC
INSTITUTIONS, WHICH WE WERE, AND
SO THE INITIAL EXPERIENCE WAS
ONE OF ISOLATION, AND THEN THE
EXPERIENCE BECAME OUT OF THAT
ISOLATION DEVELOPING A
RELATIONSHIP TO SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: AFTER GRADUATING
FROM OVERLAND COLLEGE, SESHADRI
SAIDED TO THE NORTHWEST WORKING
IN THE FISHING INDUSTRY FOR FIVE
YEARS AND FOR TWO MONTHS DOING
RESEARCH ON A BOAT IN THE BERING
SEA.
HE EVENTUALLY FOUND HIS WHICH TO
NEW YORK TO STUDY WRITING AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY AND SETTLED
THERE.
THE DETAILS FROM THOSE YEARS OF
ADVENTURE AS WELL AS THOSE SPENT
RAISING A FAMILY ALL FIND THEIR
WAY INTO HIS POETRY.
>> THE POEM IS A PROCESS OF
DISCRUFER.
I SOMETIMES YOU KIND OF KNOW
BECAUSE YOU HAVE THE END AND THE
END IS LIKE A MOMENT.
AND THEN YOU HAVE TO BUILD THE
POEM TO THAT.
BUT MOST TIMES YOU JUST SORT OF
GO ON YOUR INSTINCTS, AND I
THINK THIS GOES BACK ALSO TO MY
BEING AN IMMIGRANT THAT I TEND
TO SORT OF GRAVITATE TO THE BIG
PICTURE.E IF YOU'RE AN IMMIGRAN,
YOU'RE SORT OF ON THE FRINGE OF
SOCIETY.
YOU SEE SOCIETY AS A WHOLE.
YOU SEE PANORAMAS.
YOU KIND OF WANT TO TAKE IN THE
WHOLE THING, BECAUSE YOU MIGHT
NOT HAVE ANY PLACE IN ANY
PARTICULAR ASPECT OF THE SOCIETY
YOU'RE IN, BUT YOU CAN EMBRACE
ALL OF IT.
THERE WAS DROUGHT ON THE
MOUNTAIN.
WILDFIRES SCOUR THE HILLS SO THE
MAMMAL CRAWLS DOWN THE DESCATED
RAILS SEARCHING FOR THE
FOUNTAIN, WHICH IT FOUNDS
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, OR SORT OF
FINDS, THE THIN, SILVER SLIVER
RISES FROM AN UNDERGROUND RIVER
AND MAKES A FEW OF THE HOT ROCKS
STEAM AND THE PEBBLES HISS.
SOON THE MAMMAL WILL DRINK, BUT
IT HAS FIRST TO STOP AND THINK
ITS REFLEXIVE IMPECCABLE
THOUGHT.
THE THINKING COMES DOWN TO THIS,
MYSTERY, LONGING, THIRST.
>> Reporter: JUST THINKING ABOUT
THE PULITZERS, ONE OF THOSE
MOMENTS THE PUBLIC IS AWARE OF
POETRY IN AMERICA.
WHAT DO YOU SEE?
>> WHAT I SEE IS THIS INCREDIBLE
EXPLOSION OF WRITING, WHICH IS
FANTASTIC.
I MEAN, THERE'S SO MUCH GOOD
WRITING IN THIS COUNTRY, AND
IT'S ALL OVER THE PLACE, AND
IT'S VARIOUS.
IT'S AS VARIOUS AS IT'S COUNTRY
ITSELF.
THIS IS A GOLDEN AGE FOR
AMERICAN POETRY.
>> Reporter: VIJAY SESHADRI.
THANKS AGAIN AND
CONGRATULATIONS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE SUPREME COURT CURVED THE
PRESIDENT'S POWER TO MAKE
APPOINTMENTS DURING A
CONGRESSIONAL RECESS.
THE JUSTICES ALSO RULED AGAINST
SETTING FIXED BUFFER ZONES TO
KEEP ABORTION PROTESTERS AWAY
FROM CLINICS.
ASKED CONGRESS FOR 500 MILLION
TO TRAIN IRAQI FORCES.
HOWARD BAKER DIED AT 88.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, IN 2008, TWO
FILMMAKERS SPOTTED THE MAKINGS
FOR A PERFECT DOCUMENTARY.
FIVE YEARS LATER THEIR STORY
CULMINATED WITH A MONUMENTAL
SUPREME COURT DECISION THAT
WOULD PAVE THE WAY FOR SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE IN CALIFORNIA.
WE TALKED TO THE DIRECTORS OF
"THE CASE AGAINST EIGHT" ON ART
BEAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: BEFORE WE GO, ANE.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, I MISTAKENLY
SAID THAT DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING
JR. AND HIS WIFE CORETTA SCOTT
KING HAD BEEN AWARDED THE
CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR.
THEY WERE HONORED POSTHUMOUSLY
WITH THE CONGRESSIONAL GOLD
MEDAL.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT A
PROGRAM IN CALIFORNIA THAT IS
DESIGNED TO MANAGE MEDICAL PLANS
FOR THOSE ELDERLY WHO QUALIFY
FOR BOTH MEDICARE AND MEDICAID.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND RAMESH PONNURU AMONG
OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.